at the heart of this part of lecture
lies the simple fact that sometimes
things go wrong while the program is
running so maybe you're reading files
from disk and it turns out one of them
is 380 terabytes or something and you
can't actually load that all into memory
you don't have that much maybe you try
to create an object and then cast it as
something that it is not that is the
dynamic types don't line up and so you
get a class cast exception maybe we get
a minus one array index out of bounds
that error like we had before and so the
Java approach to those situations is to
throw an exception so what does that
mean well the program stops what it's
doing and it does something else and so
far that something else has been
crashing and printing out a message that
is hopefully useful to the user or
programmer of that class so as we saw in
our example before those exceptions can
occur either implicitly like for example
I create an object that's a string and
it's so it's dynamic type of string and
then I try to cast it as a planet and
that doesn't work and we get a class
cast exception we also saw we can have
explicit exceptions and so I'll give
another example here maybe we print out
a message and then we throw a runtime
exception for no reason at all and so if
we actually run this program we'll get
the printed message and then the
exception happens for no reason so I'll
note here that this is not entirely new
we the word throw is new we didn't have
that keyword but new runtime exception
that's actually just like any other
object instantiation we did in the past
it creates a new object of type runtime
exception and it is thrown so it's a
runtime exception exactly well runtime
exceptions are part of the java.lang
package and each java.lang runtime
exception it is a java.lang exception in
other words this is a subclass of the
exception class and that in turn is the
subclass of throwable and throwable is
an intern a subclass of object and so
what Java does is any throwable that you
may conceive an exception or otherwise
can be thrown with the throw keyword and
as a result what Java will do when it
sees that the way the interpreter works
is it says ok stop what you're doing
you've been given an exception and you
break the usual flow of control and
we'll talk about what happens from there
in a moment
so exceptions though I just want to
mention that there are there instances
of classes just like pretty much
everything else in Java and you know it
has a couple different constructors and
once it's thrown then something
interesting happens so what we've seen
as I mentioned a moment ago is that
usually a program just crashes but you
can actually also catch an exception and
this is a concept you may have seen in
another language or maybe not so
basically what catching does is it
prevents the program from crashing when
it's running so suppose I create a new
dog named Lucy who's a retriever
weighing 80 pounds so maybe Lucy becomes
angry and then if we try to pet the dog
that is Lucy receives a pat if she's
upset she'll throw an exception and say
I don't want to get touched but rather
than letting the program crash will
actually catch that exception and print
it out and let the code keep running so
in this case we run this program it says
tried to Pat however we got a runtime
exception cur snarl snarl that's that's
the exception here that's apparently the
message thrown by Lucy but after
catching that exception the program
keeps running so rather than crashing at
this point and never printing we
actually get down here to this final
print line and we get Lucy is the
displeased retriever weighing 80 pounds
so in this case the code didn't crash
because we caught the exception now why
would you ever do that well one reason
is you can actually maybe take
corrective action instead of inside of a
catch block so suppose I create a new
dog Lucy who's a retriever and weighs 80
pounds maybe Lucy becomes angry and then
when the code runs whenever we this time
whenever the dog tries to get petted
padded then we will print out the
exception and then feed the dog a banana
hopefully to appease it the dog will
then receive a pat again and then we'll
print let's see what happens so in this
case we say Java exception demo Lucy
becomes upset we try to Pat Lucy and we
get java.lang run time exception snarl
snarl however we then feed the dog a
banana and apparently this eight treat
method prints at Lucy much as the banana
we then try to pet Lucy and in this case
Lucy enjoys the path she did not throw
an exception this time which is great
and then finally we can print out Lucy
and this time she's a happy retriever
weighing 80 pounds so good job we have
caught something now this kind of
catching right this is kind of a silly
example but in the real world maybe the
exception you get is that like an
antenna it's not extended on a robot so
if you catch that exception
you can then extend the antenna and
proceed as you want it sometimes it's
not actually a corrective action and we
just want to write out a log file or
turn on a blinking light or whatever it
may be there are reasons for particular
exceptions we might have different
things happen